chore(docs): keys concept page refactor (#17509)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs/developers/docs/concepts/accounts/keys.md

This ensures only the rightful owner can spend notes, while the app-siloing provides additional security isolation between contracts.

:::tip

This last point could be confusing for most developers: how could a protocol verify a secret key is derived from another secret key without knowing it? Well, _you_ make that derivation, generating a ZK proof for it. The protocol just verifies that ZK proof!

:::

### Address Keys

**Purpose**: Address derivation and note encryption setup

Address keys are the foundation for [deterministic address computation](../accounts/index.md#address-derivation). They enable a critical feature: anyone can encrypt notes to your address without needing additional keys, just your address.

The address key pair consists of:

- Private key: `address_sk = pre_address + ivsk`
- Public key: `AddressPublicKey = address_sk * G` (elliptic curve point)

#### How Addresses are Computed

The `pre_address` binds together your keys and account contract code, making each address unique and deterministic:

<Image img={require("@site/static/img/address_derivation.png")} />

```
pre_address = hash(public_keys_hash, partial_address)

where:

>   public_keys_hash = hash(Npk_m, Ivpk_m, Ovpk_m, Tpk_m)

Reviewer: We haven't mentioned what Ivpk_m, Ovpk_m. Based on the diagram, i removed `Tpk_m`

Reviewer: maybe move the "Address Keys" section to to after the section on incoming keys

  partial_address = hash(contract_class_id, salted_initialization_hash)
  contract_class_id = hash(artifact_hash, fn_tree_root, public_bytecode_commitment)
  salted_initialization_hash = hash(deployer_address, salt, constructor_hash)
```

This derivation ensures:

- The address is deterministic (can be computed before deployment)
- Keys and contract code are cryptographically bound to the address
- The address proves ownership of the nullifier key needed to spend notes

:::note
While the `Ovpk` (outgoing viewing key) exists in the protocol, it is not currently used. It's available for future protocol upgrades or custom implementations.
:::

### Incoming Viewing Keys

**Purpose**: Receiving and decrypting private notes

> Incoming viewing keys enable private transfer of value and data. The sender uses the recipient's public viewing key (`Ivpk`) to encrypt notes, and the recipient uses their secret viewing key (`ivsk`) to decrypt them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incoming viewing keys enable private information to be shared with recipients. The sender uses the recipient's public viewing key (`Ivpk`) to encrypt notes, and the recipient uses their secret viewing key (`ivsk`) to decrypt them.
```

**The encryption flow:**

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: This diagram looks really small on my laptop screen. maybe break it up into two rows?

<img width="2161" height="1091" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6f26a9fd-fdee-4192-b765-0d974ee46688" />

## Signing Key Storage Patterns

Since signing keys are application-defined, how the public key is stored is entirely up to the account contract design. Each approach has different trade-offs:

### Immutable Private Note (Recommended for Most Cases)

Stores the key in a private note that is never nullified, providing the best balance of security and cost.

#include_code public_key noir-projects/noir-contracts/contracts/account/schnorr_account_contract/src/main.nr rust

**Pros:**

- No additional cost per transaction
- Key remains private
- Simple implementation

**Cons:**

- Cannot rotate the key
- If key is compromised, must deploy a new account

:::note Wallet Responsibilities
Private note storage relies on wallet infrastructure:

- Wallets must backup all notes for device restoration
- Notes can exist locally (PXE only) or be broadcast encrypted to yourself (exists onchain)
:::

### Mutable Private Note

Stores the key in a note that can be updated, enabling key rotation.

**Pros:**

- Supports key rotation
- Key remains private

**Cons:**

- Each transaction nullifies and recreates the note (expensive)
- Higher cost per transaction

> ### Delayed Public Mutable State

Reviewer: I know this is possible, but do we want to recommend it as an option? what is a case where having the public key be public be useful?

Stores the key in [delayed public mutable state](../../guides/smart_contracts/how_to_define_storage.md#delayed-public-mutable) - publicly accessible but privately readable with a delay window.

**Pros:**

- Supports key rotation
- No extra nullifiers/commitments per transaction

**Cons:**

- Transactions have time-to-live constraints (determined by delay window)
- Minimum delays restrict rotation frequency
- Key is public

### Keystore Contract

Stores keys in a separate contract that multiple accounts can reference.

**Pros:**

- One keystore serves multiple accounts
- Centralized key management
- No fee overhead (just proving time)

**Cons:**

- Higher proving time per transaction
- More complex architecture

> ### Reuse Protocol Keys (Not Recommended)

Reviewer: since this is not recommended, let's remove it

Reuses an in-protocol key (like incoming viewing key) as the signing key.

**Pros:**

- No storage needed (validated against address)

**Cons:**

- **Reduces account security** - compromises separation of concerns
- Not recommended for production use

> ## Key Management

Reviewer: I think this section is more important than Signing Key storage patterns. lets move this section up

### Key Generation and Derivation

Protocol keys (nullifier, address, and incoming viewing keys) are automatically generated by the [Private Execution Environment (PXE)](../pxe/index.md) when creating an account. The PXE handles:

- Initial key pair generation
- App-siloed key derivation
- Secure key storage and oracle access
- Key material never leaves the client

> All keys use elliptic curve cryptography on the [Grumpkin curve](https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-connect/blob/9374aae687ec5ea01adeb651e7b9ab0d69a1b33b/markdown/specs/aztec-connect/src/primitives.md):

Reviewer: this links to the Aztec Connect  repo
```suggestion
All keys use elliptic curve cryptography on the Grumpkin curve:
```

**How it works:**
```pseudocode
nsk_app = hash(nsk_m, app_contract_address)
ivsk_app = hash(ivsk_m, app_contract_address)
```

**Security benefits:**

1. **Damage containment**: If a key for one app leaks, other apps remain secure
2. **Selective auditability**: Share viewing access for one app without exposing entire activity
3. **Privacy preservation**: Activity in different apps cannot be correlated via keys

For example, users could give a block explorer their viewing key for a DEX contract to display trades, while keeping their activity in other contracts completely private.

### Key Rotation

**Protocol keys (nullifier, address, incoming viewing):** Cannot be rotated. They are embedded in your address, which is immutable. If compromised, you must deploy a new account.

**Signing keys:** Fully rotatable, depending on your account contract implementation. You can:

- Change keys on a schedule
- Rotate after suspicious activity
- Implement time-delayed rotation for security
- Use different storage patterns that enable rotation (mutable notes, delayed public state, keystore contracts)

## Advanced: Special Contract Cases

### Non-Account Contracts with Keys

> Typically, only account contracts have non-zero public keys. However, some contracts like **escrow** or **custodial** contracts need keys even though they aren't accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, only account contracts have non-default public keys. However, some contracts like **escrow** or **custodial** contracts need keys even though they aren't accounts.
```
Default public keys are not zero, see here: https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/blob/e82340416e2237d30e64cc0034d44eed895ec514/yarn-project/stdlib/src/keys/public_keys.ts#L78
